From Hansel minutes.gov it's Hansel
minutes. Our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists, Scott
handsomer. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number three 73. Recorded
live Thursday, May 23rd, 2013. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
teller offering the best and
developer tools and support online@telerikdotcomandmyfranklins.net
makers of gesture pack a
powerful gesture, recording and recognition
system for Microsoft connect for
windows developers details@gesturepak.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Mark
Rendell about making the change
from desktop to web development.
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes and I've
got my buddy Mark Rendell
on the phone from England.
How are you? I'm fine.
Thanks. How are you? Lovely,
lovely. You and I always
have these kind of spirited
discussions slash arguments. I like
to call them lower lowercase,
a arguments, and you have
been a desktop guy for,
for a long time. I
mean, putting out 20 years
and counting and you do
like C and needed C
and C plus plus, I
mean, you really made the
desktop saying, yeah, went through
windows 3.15 and all those
things with lots of different
languages, which is probably for
the best and then through
when those forms and then
WPF and Silverlight. So yeah,
hardcore desktop developer didn't really
had much to offer the
world. Yeah. And web apps
have, were, you know, were
documents effectively for a very,
very long time. And even
until recently, it was just
like you click and then
the entire page refreshes. So
you were basically kind of
reading this book and going
from page to page to
page. And I always say
that Gmail is when we
kind of first noticed, or
maybe maybe outlook web access
was when things started to
change. And you said, Hey,
this could be an app.
Yeah. Even then you were
still not convinced. No, I
just, it was just a,
you loaded an application on
your desktop and it's loaded.
And then it's pulling data
and doing interesting things with
it and generating graphs or,
or exporting data and interacting
with offers and all the
other things you've got on
your desktop. And I just
didn't see how web applications
could compete with that until
quite recently. And it is
the last couple of years.
I mean, you were in
build 2011, still arguing against
JavaScript itself. I was, although
funnily enough, I went off.
So they handed out the
slate of bill. And I
went off to my hotel
that evening and motion application
in C sharp, for example.
But as I got more
into working with building windows
eight apps, I actually started
writing the, the UI code
in C shop and using
the icing code whites and
all that good stuff. But
I started doing the UIs
in HTML just because I
found it easier to work
with, with CSS for doing
the responsive screen. And when
you went to sentence different
States and that sort of
thing, and yeah, having been
quite a fan of XAML
for quite a long time,
I suddenly got into doing
things with HTML and CSS,
and I'll just actually for
describing this does appear to
be better in, in many
ways, Certainly our responsive one.
I think that's the thing
that, you know, XAML is
ridiculously powerful almost to the
point where the, well, not
almost to the point the,
the on ramp to XAML
is pretty steep, you know,
to really be good. Yeah.
But I think, I mean,
the OnRamp to HTML is
more shallow. Certainly both of
them ratchet up pretty quickly
and they're in their difficulty,
but the, the initial on-ramp
to just animals pretty hardcore.
It is. And particularly with
the whole MVVM and when
you get into the needing
to write your application in
such a way that a
designer can come along with
blend and work with just
the, for example, not with
the underlying code. And so
you've got kind of mock
data contexts or, or whatever
else is going on. And
when you get into theming
and styling with sample that
whole side of things, which
is still in XAML is
really scary compared to CSS.
Cause there's no CSS, for
example, no, there's, there's just
more sample and it's just
pile on top of Zamboni
again, to kind of resource
dictionaries and results section dictionaries
referencing other resource dictionaries. So
we don't want to pile
on, on XAML. What I
think is the interesting story
here is your kind of
personal transformation and it's not
about quitting one thing and
jumping all in on the
other, you know, that although
those kinds of stories were
always interesting. This is more
of a, you really just
didn't think that the web
was nearly as useful as,
as most people did. You
were desktop and desktop till
the end. Yeah. I, I
honestly, a year, year and
a half ago, I could
not have seen myself becoming
a web developer. And that
was partly just thinking it's
not mature enough to build
proper applications. And however far
it catches up desktop tools
and WPF and Simon and
all these things are gonna
stay two or three steps
ahead of that. But just
the last last year also
HTML five is getting more
and more support. And I
E nine had a lot
of improvements that came along
and I attended Metro in
the windows eight tablets. And
I just started to think,
you know, maybe you can
actually do something useful here
and started investigating the totals.
And once I started investigating
the tools and the frameworks
that were available, it was
more okay, well, I have
this, there's some really cool
stuff here. You can actually
do really great things with
this. Does this, does this
make you think the desktop
is dead? Because like I
say, people always go back
and forth with these things.
They'll they'll declare that, Oh,
well this is clearly the,
you know, the desktop is
going to die. Now the
web is all there is,
but then something on the,
on the, on the desktop
will happen. That's so amazing
that no one can believe
it, you know? And then
we'll, well, we'll bring the
metronome back. Yeah, absolutely. I
mean, I I'm currently waiting
until I have enough money
in the bank to buy
a new full tower desktop
computer just because I want
something with a Nvidia graphics
card and all that sort
of stuff. And they're all
things that I still think
for a long time are
going to be the desktop
if for no other reason
than a data transfer and
with, for a lot of
people, isn't at the point
yet where you can kind
of just quickly load up
a one gigabyte raw image
file that you've taken with
your 50 megapixel camera and
load that into the browser
and start working with it.
So, you know, Adobe creative
cloud, it might be called
predictive count, but it's still
a bunch of desktop applications.
Hotsy Photoshop becoming a browser
based application for awhile, but
I can see within the
next five to 10 years,
visual studio to becoming a
principal stuff and obviously word
and Excel and PowerPoint already
have browser based applications. And
they do most of them,
the, the version, It's not
an unreasonable kind of leap
of logic. If you think
about it. I mean the
outlook web application is really
amazing, you know, especially, especially
the new one, if you've
used the office three 65.
Yes. I hate to say
it, but I sometimes find
myself using the, the web
version of outlook just because
it's lighter weight than the
desktop one. Yeah. Faster. And
it's, and, and it gets
you there quicker. And I
just find myself more and
more these days where I
look down at my task
bar and the only things
open the branches and kind
of wishing actually the, some
of the things that are
down there were in the
browser. Although still, We don't
want a Chromebook though. Isn't
that funny? Like, like we
all say, isn't it wonderful
that we only run the
browser and then one or
two apps. And then when
we are given a computer
that runs only the browser,
we're like, yeah, Yeah. I,
it's nice to know that
on those times when, when
my cable company manages to
completely disconnect broadband for anything,
I can still do most
things on my computer. Can't
play SIM city obviously, but
I can do much things.
So yeah, but it's, it's
increasingly skates kind of switched
the other way. So where
I used to saying, there's
the desktop application and then
the web version is the
lightweight alternative. Now I'm thinking
there's the web application. And
the desktop is the heavyweight
alternative when there's something that
I can't do in the
browser app, for whatever reason
that might be. And I
mean, Spotify is a great
example. I've got a windows
eight machine and there are
issues with the Spotify desktop
application on windows eight, depending
on what and so forth.
But I have that run
again, a Chrome tab and
it's fine, it's it does
everything that the, the desktop
application does and Spotify doesn't
work offline anyway. So, you
know, even if you've got
the desktop application, it's still
not caching things locally. And
that's just more and more
and more, you look at
some of the things that
some people are doing. So,
I mean, the parental based
office three, six, five applications
are one example. I don't
know if you've played much
with cloud nine . Yeah.
It's, it's it, that's the
thing that makes you believe
that maybe you could in
fact do visual studio? Yeah.
I mean, I would probably
be thinking about trying to
do a, a C sharp
net IDE in the browser,
if it wasn't for the
fact that Microsoft are currently
pushing things on a visual
studio.com, the language makes me
think maybe that's going to
happen anyway. And I don't
want to waste too much
time on it. The new,
yeah. The new TFS stuff,
all runs@visualstudio.com and you can
have like your own domain.
You can have your own
sub domains. Like I have
Hanselman taught visual studio.com. Yeah.
I mean, I've got my
stuff in their room. I'm
using to get service in
it rather than the, the
TFS service. But I'm pretty
much the only person who
works on like gets, got
a much nicer workflow for
a single user than TFS.
No, I think that when
I say TFS, I'm not
talking about the source control,
TFS, the issue tracking and
all that stuff I use.
Yeah, Yeah, yeah. I'm sorry.
So then I was going
to say the, the brains
of CFS for various reasons,
I'll use TFS in Firefox
because I'll use it with
a different client ID. Then
I use in my other
browsers, but the browser based
tools for the task pole
to canvas board, and just
the general overview of why
you better, because you get
like an entire browser window
instead of that little team
Explorer assigned fall, which is
trying to cram all that
information in and, you know,
editing story cards and moving
things across and all this
sort of stuff is in
the browser. You've got this
lovely gooey story, whereas in
visual studio, it doesn't seem
to be quite the same.
The thing that I find
the most frustrating when I'm
doing work on, on the
web is I just, I
still don't feel like the,
like the debugging story is
quite there. You know, I
find myself in visual studio
and I'm doing stuff. And
then I run over into
Chrome or into IIE and
I hit F 12 and
I struggled to really understand
what the heck's going on
in JavaScript. I feel like
there's an opportunity to kind
of disrupt things with a
much better experience for explaining
what exactly is going on
right now. You know, I
think so. I think, I
think some of that's down
to JavaScript as a language
and the fact that it's
it's dynamic. And so there's
a limit to how much
information you can have while
you're debugging through it in
the browser. The thing that
really annoys me with the
debugging experience is that there
are things that each of
the three grounds as all
use does really well. And
I just think why com
why Chrome do I quick
watch? And the sort of
the stuff that's built in
for inspecting variables, I don't
like the way Chrome does
the variable inspection I use.
It's more like visual studio.
So that works me, but
at the same time, X,
toilet developer tools extensible, right?
And then in Firefox, it's
really, it's not Firefox. It's
find a bug and you
install that. And there's some
really great stuff in there,
but they're not, it's not
deeply integrated into the browser.
And also it's sending itself
every however often it is.
But have you had a
chance to play with Sourcemap
deep hugging and Chrome with
type skirts? Yeah. In fact,
I have a, because if
you've played with a V
S web essentials, Mads Christianson's
playground for our asp.net labs,
he'll make source maps for
you with anything. So you
can actually right. Click in
the solution Explorer and minify
stuff. And then of course,
with TypeScript, you can just
stash sash source maps, and
it'll spit source maps out.
When you do your, your
compilation at the command line,
I actually ended up putting
that in my CS proj.
So that, that stuff happens
on bill. Yes. I have
a, I have a prebuilt
staff that does a CSC
dot ECC across all my
times for class, but it's
one of the things with
the IEP team. They're a
longer release cadence than Chrome.
And Firefox is you don't
get these advances coming in
because the F 12 developer
tools aren't extensible That I
eat does not have source
map control. No. So they're
basically for when you're working
with TypeScript, you've got two
options. One is to debug
in visual studio, which it
works, but it doesn't feel
particularly natural. Let's back up
a moment and just give
people an understanding about what
source maps are and why
we should care about them.
Okay. So soul smacks like
a PDB file for Java
script that you all use
generated by compiling another language
like TypeScript or copy script
or closure, or when you
have passed your JavaScript through
a minute fire and turned
it into a single unreadable
line of randomness and assaults
map will link bits of
either that JavaScript file back
to the line of source
code that is originally came
from, and if you're using
Chrome debugger tools or a
full TypeScript, if you're working
in visual studio 2012 with
the TypeScript plugin, you can,
you still have to set
the break points in the
JavaScript when it breaks. It
goes to the TypeScript file
that that JavaScript was compiled
from. And then you can
step debug through the TypeScript.
So you hit half 10,
and it goes to the
next line of TypeScript. And
you can view the TypeScript
variables and all that sort
of thing, which obviously, you
know, couple of years ago,
you were talking about JavaScript
as the assembly language for
the web. And, but one
of the big issues with
it was the particular, you
know, coffee scripts, feed pig
for a couple of years,
but when people were trying
to work out why their
coffee script wasn't working, they
were having to step debug
through the JavaScript and then
try and work out how
to fix that in the
coffee script. Or if you
were me instinctively fixing it
in the JavaScript and then
overriding that the next time
you failed. So now you
have source maps and you
can actually, you can break
that divide in the same
way that, you know, as
desktop native programmers or seashell
programmers, you don't have to
set debug through the bank
code. You can link it
back to the seashell, but
it came from an inspect
things there. Right? Right. Cause
web applications have a, you
know, reasonably sized ones have
this idea of a release,
a release mode. And the
configuration of the application that
you work on in release
mode is different from the
debug mode one. Yeah. You
know, for a small app,
you can absolutely go and
throw out your application exactly.
As you work on it.
But when you put it
into production, you minify things,
you compress things, you change
settings, you include all sorts
of things in source maps
for that bridge. And that's
a killer feature. Like you
have to have that. And
if you're going to start
using something like TypeScript or
coffee script, and you want
to debug back to the
original, it's so important to
have. And if I use
developer tools were written in
Java script, presumably we would
be able to, to extend
them. Yes. I don't know
what, what, Google's, what Chrome's
developer tools are written in.
But one of my longtime
bugbears with all your, that
it's not particularly extensible, which
is, it's a shame, What
have you built? What is,
this is, this is not
holding you back apparently. Like
what have you built that
is comparable to a desktop
application now that has got
you. So, so stoked about
the web. So I spent
the last year and a
half nearly building a studio,
which is a storage as
your storage management tool. That's
done entirely in the browser
and HTML five. And at
runtime it's JavaScript. But when
I'm building it, it's, it's
a few thousand lines of
TypeScript split across 40 old
files. And it's very strange.
I have, I have my
web application, which has got
control of this folder and
all sorts service line stuff.
And then there's also an
app folder, which has got
all my TypeScript inside it.
And inside there, I've got
the same thing for the
client sites. I've got controllers
and the services folder that'll
these TypeScript files is spread
across all these things. And
then I have a pill
process that combines them all
together, and then it follows
the other person. And yeah,
it's the, the fact that
the only tool, the only
tools that were available for
managing the CEO's storage were
desktop applications was frustrating me
at first because I wanted
to be able to use
my own pad. And then
there is other tablets and
phones and things. And then
because you have licensing that
says, you can to use
this on two machines, otherwise
you have to put another
license and you just, I've
got, I have a lot
of computers that I have
access to. And so, yeah,
I thought, let's see if
I can build that as
a web app. I originally
thought I'm going to do
an iPad for working with
CEO storage. But then I
thought, well, if I read
well, but Android and other
things are then windows eight
tablet coming along. So I
thought I'd try and do
it as a web app
started the first time through
using a third party controls
library for JavaScript and jQuery
and knock out for binding
and so forth. I haven't
got one third of the
application written and I was
reasonably happy with it, but
the code was a mess
and there should be a
full time group came along.
And when you're writing Java
scripts, unless you are very
experienced and you've developed some
good practices over the years,
you tend to end up
with your JavaScript all over
the place. And some of
us in script tags and
some of it's in that
file over there, because there
is no full build process.
I could never really find
a way of, of getting
much JavaScript, grateful, organized Phrase
differently. As I've said before
that either compilation is the
first unit test. I was
talking last week with Brian
from lucid chart. And he
was telling me that they
use closure and write a
whole bunch of JavaScript. Lucid
chart is their kind of
Vizio for the web application.
And it is, you know,
many, many thousands of lines
of JavaScript. And he says
that having this compilation step
or having more specifically having
type checking catches an entire
class of errors that you
just wouldn't catch otherwise, like
even the best JavaScript person
might not might have these
errors as latent sitting there,
unless they have a lot
of unit test coverage to
catch them. Yeah. And, and
you can write unit tests
that will catch these things,
but you are writing unit
tests just to catch tiny
players. And so if you
can, if you can have
a compiler that runs and
you can say to that
compiler, okay. So any object
that gets passed to this
function has to have these
three properties and potentially have
these other two, like you
can't with TypeScript interfaces then
rather than you having to
go, well, what are the
possible things that could happen
and what could go wrong
here and everything else you
can just go and the
component that will just go,
you idiot, you've left off
the count property on this
thing that you're trying to
pass through a web service,
which is blatantly not do
it again. And then, But
why not? Why isn't that
different from just using like
JS Lynch? Cause JS, Linda
doesn't know, it doesn't know
about types. It will pick
up things like missing 70
COVID so you can get
it to pick up. I
I'll use, I prefer to,
I guess, hint to JS
Lynch because JS, hint doesn't
tell me that I haven't
laid out my code. Right.
But yeah, JS him we'll
say equals they're probably meant
to use a triple equals
and, and things like that.
But it can't tell if
you've got a chain of
functions, what's the shape of
the objects that are being
passed between those functions should
be. So it can't pick
up tiny Paris because it's
working with a dynamic language.
What TypeScript does is it
says for all of these
functions, I can basically just
annotate the parameters and say,
this needs to be this
interface, or this is a
string. And then if I
try and call a function,
lips, expecting a string and
try and possibly in there,
then it'll tell me about
it. And I've had people
who questioned the usefulness of
this, and I just try
and point them to the
number of times every day,
I hear to have sex
and have errors type errors
in my TypeScript. So, you
know, maybe it's just because
I suck, but yeah, I
need to have my hand
held by the complainant or
stop me from making stupid
mistakes. But you know, it's,
it's a possibly a luxury
tool it's possibly just a
nice thing to have, but
it makes me more productive.
It makes me less likely
to release code into the
wild. So it is going
to say object not defined
or property not found. And
particularly since my target market
is largely web developers, these
are the guys who, if
there's an error in the
Java script, it's not going
to show a little yellow
triangle down and it's going
to throw up a huge
breakdown, a lock box, debug,
this they're going to go.
So yeah, having talked to
groups in levers, I think
it's, it's really accelerated my,
my journey to the dark
side of the life side,
depending on your point of
view. And do you think
that this is something that's
going to become more mainstream?
I mean, like there are
those that find TypeScript or
coffee script or closure or
whatever, and they say, this
is it. I found it.
This is what I need
to be doing. And then
there are others who just
say no, no, always get
back to that. There's almost
a get back to the
metal kind of Renaissance right
now. We're on JavaScript. Like
we're all learning assembler, right?
We're all learning assembler. And
now it's time to, you
know, move to C and
the, the, the assembler folks
are like, yeah, I don't
really know. I kinda like
assembler. It's important to know
assembler. Yeah. Let's see. Plus,
plus guys arguing with the
C guys and the sequelae
scoring objects and your pre
compiler stuff and all this
nonsense, you just, you just
need structures and functions and
get on with it. So
I, I think some of
the evolutions in the JavaScript
language, the currently talking about
with the script six touch
script actually just gives you
a lot of those now
in a way that compiles
to JavaScript until JavaScript catches
up. And then it'll just
go, I'll show you that,
that I think the backlash
is more again, I was
talking to someone earlier about
this today. It's more against
the libraries and particularly, I
think jQuery is getting a
hard time at the moment.
And I have to say
you kind of, you just
drag jQuery on to your,
your HTML files, we see
S HTML files without even
thinking about it. And you
just use dollar Corrine, hash
something or dot something because
it's just there. And you
forget that it's not part
of the language. I actually
had a guy, a reporter,
an issue with studio where
the landing page came up
and it loads the landing
page very quickly. He does
that very quickly and he
was clicking the login button
and it wasn't working for
like four seconds because it
was downloading J query. So
that jQuery per say, dollar
dot login button dot on
Clayco or whatever it was.
And it's just, I hadn't
thought about it. And so
that was the only thing
I was downloading a 50
K file into people's browsers
so that I could add
a click event handler to
a button. And it just
kind of, I don't think
I really need to do
that. I can, I can
rewrite that with a query
element and just add a
click handler with the head
event listener. So yeah, I
think I have to write
three extra lines of code
over what was already there.
Right. And eliminated kind of
a 50 K downloads, I
think, but yeah, I'll just
have consult about it. And
I think that's the, that's
the backlash is people including
jQuery. So they don't have
to think rather than including
jQuery for what was originally
intended for, which was to
cover the, the disparities between
different browsers, implementations of the
dome and the, the JavaScript
models and so forth. So,
and even jQuery 2.0, I
think they've lost 19 pay
off the font size by
dropping support for the older
browsers. Right. But it's still
big and they still need
it. So I think that's,
that's the backlash. I think
they're the viewer, the big
kind of NVW frameworks like
angular JS, which is what
I'm using a backbone, a
number and so forth. Those
knockouts and breeze, those are
actually bringing a level of
convenience and helpfulness and helping
you do stuff. So take
a very long time to
do with the notes and
all the scripts. And so
I don't think anyone saying
stop using them. So building
these big applications, I think
it's just stop using jQuery
for everything. Stop putting the
dollar there all the time,
a lot of stop using
jQuery altogether, but just think
about it. If you, if
you come upon J query
call in your entire application,
maybe you should rewrite it
just using JavaScript. I definitely
think there's a maturity that
is coming soon. I think
that we are all writing
assembler and we're all used
to using different libraries. So
we're going to kind of
thrash for a little bit
as we try to figure
out what exactly this thing
that we're building wants to
become and then a to
whatever the next step is.
Yeah. Yeah. I think that's
probably right. But all I
know is that I spent
the last six months having
got to the point where
I had unmanageable unmaintainable maintainable
code in JavaScript and various
other things. I basically through
most of the way, rewrote
the whole of studio from
scratch and TypeScript and angular
JS and using Twitter's bootstrap
components. And I have not
had this much fun coding
for a very long time.
I think since I first
found C-sharp. So when I
went from what I was
on to C sharp, just
got, this is a mess
language ever. I know you
don't have to delete my
objects and all this sort
of thing. And yeah. Working
with, with TypeScript, with HTML
and CSS and the bootstrap
components and with angular JS,
which is, I think it's
the Holy grail of like
debunking. It just, it is
so good at working out
that you change something 15
levels down in an object
hierarchy, and just reflecting that
in the browser screen. And
yeah, it's just awesome. I'm
having a really great time
and having fun, just churning
this code down, building something
that is, is in the
browser and doing things that
I didn't think was, could
do a couple of years
ago. So yeah. So where
can people see your application
and kind of in closing,
where can they go and
see this, what you're working
on in the real world,
you can go to
to IO. Cause when you're
doing a tool like this,
you have to have a.io
domain. You can sign up
for a free trial. Now,
if you're using SEO storage,
flops, tables, or queues, then
just sign in with windows,
live ID and start your
30 day free trial. And
then when that runs out,
I'm going to give you
a discount code for handsomely
that sisters. So they'll just
going to be able to
go along and put 10
20, which will give them
20% off a one year
subscription after the free trial.
That's very of cool. Thanks
for doing that. Well, you
know, I suspect that this
is going to be a
good way to get people
who will tell me what's
wrong with it. No, that's
great. So, yeah, but it's,
I've been using it. I
haven't used up in dogfooding
all the way through building
it. It's what I use
now every day. And I
think it's, it's, I'm really
proud of it. I think
it's a good example of
what you can do with
just one guy on six
months as a web application.
And I've got a lot
of plans to expand on
it, new features and other
things. So Another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week, .